CIS241 Lab 3: play with pointers

String Processing
A DNA can be represented as an array of N characters, where N is very large (on the order of tens of
thousands). A problem in genetic research is to discover whether any pattern of length LEN is ever repeated
in the array, where LEN is a fixed and small constant, say 4.
Use the command below to download the source code dna.c from the instructor’s web page to your current
directory.

wget http://cis.gvsu.edu/~wangx/teaching/cis241/dna.c
Program dna.c is intended to find if a substring of length 4 in the given string is repeated. For the string that
is stored in array line, this program would show that substring “book” is repeated, where its first occurrence
is pointed to by pointer p1 and its second occurrence by p2. Note that the out loop in this program allows p1
to point to a substring in the given string and the inner loop allows p2 to point to a substring after p1. As
such, these two nested while-loops make it possible to compare every possible pair of substrings in a given
string. If the substring of LEN characters that p1 points to is identical to the one that p2 points to, the results
are displayed on the screen and the program terminates. If no matches are located, the program display such
a message and terminates.
In this lab, you will write C code to replace each line of pseudo-code in this program. Note that the given
pseudo-code is intended to show the main logic of this program. You may add additional statements to
address what you find necessary.
Also take the following steps to familiarize yourself with the GNU debugger gdb, which would be helpful
when you test and debug your program.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Type gcc –g dna.c –o dna to prepare an executable for gdb
Type gdb dna to run gdb on the executable
Use list to show the first ten lines of code in dna
Use list again to show the next ten lines of code in dna
Use break lineNo to set one or more breakpoints; for example, one at the first line of the out loop
and one at the first line of the inner loop
Use run to run dna until the first breakpoint is reached
Use print variable to check the current value of variable
Use step or step 2 to run one or two lines of code from where this program stopped
Use cont to make this program continue from where it is to the next breakpoint or the end of this
program if no more breakpoints are on the way
Use quit to leave gdb when the program terminates

At the gdb prompt, you may use help command to find a description about the named command. Refer the
PDF document “Unix Programming Tools” (Section 3) that is available from the following link:
http://cslibrary.stanford.edu/107/UnixProgrammingTools.pdf
When your program runs correctly, change the value of LEN from 4 to 5 and then run your program again. It
is a case in which no match can be found. Show your program to the instructor after you have done all the
above successfully.

